Add software stack for TAD development (#123)
MinBZK/ai-validation: docs/Projects/TAD/ADRs/0004-software-stack.md

# ADR-0004 Software Stack for TAD

## Context

For building our own TAD solution, we need to choose a software stack. During our earlier
POCs and market research, we gathered insight and information on technologies to use
and which not to use.

During further discussions and brainstorm sessions, a software stack was chosen
that accommodates our needs best.

While more fine grained [requirements](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/requirements) are listed elsewhere,
some key requirements are:

> * the tool is runnable on local dev machines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the tool is locally runable with docker
```

* the tool is runnable as user as a local Docker solution
* the tool is runnable on a cloud platform based on Kubernetes
* the tool supports multiple organizations, teams and projects
* the tool supports oath / keycloak

## Assumptions

We stick to one programming language to avoid unneeded complexity. As most AI related

> tooling is written in Python, this is the logical choice for our development as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tooling is written in Python, this language is the logical choice for our development as well.
```

Currenlty we do not see the need for a separate web GUI framework.
it is preferred to bundle backend and frontend in one solution.

As part of a Dutch government organization, we need to adhere to all dutch laws and standards, like

> [Digitoegankelijk](https://www.digitoegankelijk.nl/) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Digitoegankelijk](https://www.digitoegankelijk.nl/)
```

[WCAG Guidelines](https://wcag.nl/kennis/richtlijnen/wcag-2-1-richtlijnen/) .

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [WCAG Guidelines](https://wcag.nl/kennis/richtlijnen/wcag-2-1-richtlijnen/).
```

> 

Reviewer: * [Forum Standaardisatie](https://www.forumstandaardisatie.nl/)

> We do not forsee high load or many static files, therefor a separate webserver like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We do not forsee high load or many static files, therefore, a separate webserver like
```

> nginx, apache is not required. Static files will be served directly by the backend.

Reviewer: I do not think the load requirements have anything to do with the choice. We just want a ASGI server.

> nginx, apache is not required. Static files will be served directly by the backend.

Reviewer: I do not think static files will be served by the backend. Only the HTML files that include Jinja2. I will not serve images through the backend

Author: Where will images/static files come from then and do we need to include that?

Author: For fastAPI I tried this (which is why I mentioned it would be served by the backend):
`
app.mount("/static",` StaticFiles(directory="static"), name="static")
`
as mentioned here https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/static-files/

Reviewer: That is indeed fine

## Decision

### Programming language

We will use [Python](https://www.python.org/), at least v3.11.X, as programming language

> and [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) for dependency management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will support the latest 3 minor version of [Python](https://www.python.org/) v3 as programming language
```

### Backend

The Python backend will use the following key dependencies:

> * [Granian](https://github.com/emmett-framework/granian) as HTTP server
> * [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) for data validation
> * [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) for REST/API/HTML communication
> * [Jinja2](https://palletsprojects.com/p/jinja/) for templating

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Granian](https://github.com/emmett-framework/granian) as HTTP server.
* [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) for data validation.
* [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) for REST/API/HTML communication.
* [Jinja2](https://palletsprojects.com/p/jinja/) for templating.
```

Author: Thanks, solved this in another commit to avoid conflicts.

* [i18n Extension](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/extensions/#i18n-extension) for multi-lingual support.
 with [gettext](https://docs.python.org/3/library/gettext.html) or [Babel](https://babel.pocoo.org/en/latest/).

### Frontend

We will use serverside rendering of HTML, based on [HTMX](https://htmx.org/).
For styling and components we will use [NL Design System](https://github.com/nl-design-system/rijkshuisstijl-community).

### Testing

> We will use [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/8.0.x/) for unit-testing and [VCRPY](https://vcrpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

Reviewer: i would remove the version in the link of pytest

# ADR-0004 Software Stack for TAD

## Context

For building our own TAD solution, we need to choose a software stack. During our earlier
POCs and market research, we gathered insight and information on technologies to use
and which not to use.

During further discussions and brainstorm sessions, a software stack was chosen
that accommodates our needs best.

While more fine grained [requirements](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/requirements) are listed elsewhere,
some key requirements are:

* the tool is runnable on local dev machines
* the tool is runnable as user as a local Docker solution
* the tool is runnable on a cloud platform based on Kubernetes
* the tool supports multiple organizations, teams and projects

> * the tool supports oath / keycloak

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the tool supports Oauth2
```

## Assumptions

> We stick to one programming language to avoid unneeded complexity. As most AI related

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We stick to suitable programming languages. As most AI related
```

tooling is written in Python, this language is the logical choice for our development as well.

> There is no need for a complex or separate web GUI framework. Also to avoid more components and complexity,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currenlty we do not see the need for a separate web GUI framework.
```

it is preferred to bundle backend and frontend in one solution.

> As a government organization, we need to adhere to the digital inclusion standards, like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of a Dutch government organization, we need to adhere to all dutch laws and standards, like
```

[Digitoegankelijk](https://www.digitoegankelijk.nl/) and
[WCAG Guidelines](https://wcag.nl/kennis/richtlijnen/wcag-2-1-richtlijnen/) .

We do not forsee high load or many static files, therefore, a separate webserver like
nginx, apache is not required. Static files will be served directly by the backend.

## Decision

### Programming language

> We will use [Python](https://www.python.org/) v3.11.X as programming language

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will use [Python](https://www.python.org/), at least v3.11.X, as programming language
```

and [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) for dependency management.

### Backend

The Python backend will use the following key dependencies:

* [Granian](https://github.com/emmett-framework/granian) as HTTP server.
* [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) for data validation.
* [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) for REST/API/HTML communication.
* [Jinja2](https://palletsprojects.com/p/jinja/) for templating.
* [i18n Extension](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/extensions/#i18n-extension) for multi-lingual support.
 with [gettext](https://docs.python.org/3/library/gettext.html) or [Babel](https://babel.pocoo.org/en/latest/).

### Frontend

We will use serverside rendering of HTML, based on [HTMX](https://htmx.org/).
For styling and components we will use [NL Design System](https://github.com/nl-design-system/rijkshuisstijl-community).

### Testing

We will use [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/8.0.x/) for unit-testing and [VCRPY](https://vcrpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

> and [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) for module and
> integration tests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) for module and integration tests.
```

## Context

For building our own TAD solution, we need to choose a software stack. During our earlier
POCs and market research, we gathered insight and information on technologies to use
and which not to use.

During further discussions and brainstorm sessions, a software stack was chosen
that accommodates our needs best.

While more fine grained [requirements](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/requirements) are listed elsewhere,
some key requirements are:

* the tool is runnable on local dev machines
* the tool is runnable as user as a local Docker solution
* the tool is runnable on a cloud platform based on Kubernetes
* the tool supports multiple organizations, teams and projects
* the tool supports oath / keycloak

## Assumptions

We stick to one programming language to avoid unneeded complexity. As most AI related
tooling is written in Python, this is the logical choice for our development as well.

There is no need for a complex or separate web GUI framework. Also to avoid more components and complexity,
it is preferred to bundle backend and frontend in one solution.

As a government organization, we need to adhere to the digital inclusion standards, like

> [Drempelvrij](https://www.drempelvrij.nl/).

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we refer (also, or in the first place) to this: https://www.digitoegankelijk.nl/ ?

Reviewer 3: And https://wcag.nl/kennis/richtlijnen/wcag-2-1-richtlijnen/

Author: ```suggestion
[Digitale toegankelijkheid](https://www.digitoegankelijk.nl/) and [WCAG Guidelines](https://wcag.nl/kennis/richtlijnen/wcag-2-1-richtlijnen/) .
```

We do not forsee high load or many static files, therefor a separate webserver like
nginx, apache is not required. Static files will be served directly by the backend.

## Decision

### Programming language

We will use [Python](https://www.python.org/) v3.11.X as programming language
and [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) for dependency management.

### Backend

The Python backend will use the following key dependencies:

* [Granian](https://github.com/emmett-framework/granian) as HTTP server
* [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) for data validation
* TODO: decide on [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) or

>   [Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/)

Reviewer 3: or Django?

Author: It is open to debate. Today I did a little 'hello to Django' workshop, and it's an extremely powerful and it is packed with features; which is also its drawback, it may be overfeatured for what we need and it feels more steps are required to achieve functionality, which is not a bad thing, but noteworthy.

Reviewer 3: I have the same feeling. 

I'd argue we should go for FastAPI since it is more modern and async (fast).

### Frontend

> We will use an integrated GUI solution, based on [HTMX](https://htmx.org/) and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will use serverside rendering of HTML, based on [HTMX](https://htmx.org/) and
```

TODO: decide what template framework to use, like [Jinja](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/).
This combination is expected to work intuitive and fast.

TODO: decide which 'frontend' to use, like [DaisyUI](https://daisyui.com/) or more

> custom [NL Design System](https://github.com/nl-design-system/rijkshuisstijl-community).

Reviewer 3: I think we should go for the NL Design System, it seems to fit the bill quite well

Author: Yes, though I think we need to check somewhere if we are allowed to use it (or get some confirmation atleast).

TODO: if we use HTMX, validating web responses may be more difficult, as we get full HTML

> structures instead of 'simple' JSON objects

Reviewer 3: What do you mean with validating response?

Author: If an API does a 'GET' to f.e. get all TODO cards, it could response with a HTTP OK and a JSON containing a structure of 'TODO' info, which is quite easy to test (if A == B).
But using a XHTM response, containing HTML with classes etc, it becomes a bit more 'work' if changes are made to the HTML structure. Not really a bit thing, but worth mentioning I thought :)

Reviewer 3: Sure, I'd argue that that validation still happens, but that it happens elsewhere.

### Testing

We will use [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/8.0.x/) for unit-testing
and [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/)
for front-end and integration tests.
TODO: decide on [VCRPY](https://vcrpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) or [Mock Server](https://pypi.org/project/mock-server/).

### Database

> TODO: decide on [SQL Alchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/) or [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/) or other?

Reviewer 3: I don't think this is the choice that we need to make, it would be SQLAlchemy **and** SQLite. Or SQLAlchemy and Postgress. 

A choice we may still want to make is whether we'd like relational databases vs document stores

Author: You're right, my mistake.

* [Granian](https://github.com/emmett-framework/granian) as HTTP server
* [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) for data validation
* [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) for REST/API/HTML communication

> * [JinjaX](https://jinjax.scaletti.dev/) for templating

Reviewer 3: I wasn't aware of JinjaX, looks nice!

Author: Agreed, however in the group discussion there was more support for Jinja2 is it is more widely adopted.

### Frontend

We will use serverside rendering of HTML, based on [HTMX](https://htmx.org/) and
TODO: decide what template framework to use, like [Jinja](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/).
This combination is expected to work intuitive and fast.

> TODO: decide how to implement / handle multi-lingual support

Reviewer 3: great question!

Jinja2 has this extension: https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/extensions/#i18n-extension

A quick search didn't yield this for JinjaX (yet)
